README.md, before:

**TODO**: 

- Weight initializers
    - Logistic Regression init. for `softmax` layers (esp. for large layers -- e.g., bilinear pooling output)
    - Try [ConvolutionAware](https://github.com/keras-team/keras-contrib/blob/master/keras_contrib/initializers/convaware.py) from `keras_contrib.initializers`
- Base CNN builders 
    - Convert weights from ResNet18/34 pre-trained `Caffe` models
    - Check out wide/dilated ResNet blocks from [keras-contrib/applications](https://github.com/keras-team/keras-contrib/blob/master/keras_contrib/applications))
- Finish FV-CNN (Fisher Vector encoding of pre-trained features using `cyvlfeat`)
    - Note that this is more like pooling than dimensionality reduction. Encoding of a set of `N` feature vectors with size `D` using a GMM with `k` clusters has size `2*k*D`. And typically, `N ~ 2*k`.
- Tests and benchmarks

# keras-texture

Implementations of several `keras` layers and other utilities that are useful in constructing models for texture recognition and fine-grained classification problems. It is a work in progress, and currently the `tensorflow` backend is required.

Now develop-mode installable with `pip install -e .` The root module of package is `texture`.

# Requirements

- `numpy`
- `scikit-image`
- `keras`>=2.0
- `tensorflow`

Fisher vector encoding utilities in `texture.fisher` (planned) will require [cyvlfeat](https://github.com/menpo/cyvlfeat), which should be installed using conda: `conda install -c menpo cyvlfeat`, if possible. This is not required for using the rest of the package, so it is not explicitly enforced in `setup.py`.

The TensorFlow requirement is also not enforced, due to the ambiguity between `tensorflow` and `tensorflow-gpu`. This package supports CPU or GPU versions, since some functionality (*e.g.*, Fisher vector encoding with ImageNet pretrained models) doesn't necessarily require a GPU.

# Contents

## `Encoding` Layer

The residual encoding layer proposed in [Deep TEN: Texture Encoding Network](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.02844.pdf) [*CVPR*, 2017]. This `keras` implementation is largely based on the [PyTorch-Encoding](https://github.com/zhanghang1989/PyTorch-Encoding) release by the paper authors.

<p align="center">
  <img src="./docs/Encoding-Layer_diagram.png?raw=true" alt="Encoding-Layer diagram"/>
</p>

The layer learns a `KxD` dictionary of codewords (a "codebook"), and codeword assignment `scale` weights. These are used to encode the residuals of an input of shape `NxD` or `HxWxD` with respect to the codewords. Includes optional L2 normalization of output vectors (`True` by default) and dropout (`None` by default). Unlike the `PyTorch-Encoding` version, only the number of codewords `K` needs to be specified at construction time -- the feature size `D` is inferred from the `input_shape`.

## `BilinearModel` Layer

`BilinearModel` is a trainable `keras` layer implementing the weighted outer product of inputs with shape `[(batches,N),(batches,M)]`. The original idea of bilinear modeling for computer vision problems was proposed in [Learning Bilinear Models for Two-Factor Problems in Vision](http://www.merl.com/publications/docs/TR96-37.pdf) [*CVPR*, 1997].

It is used in the `Deep Encoding Pooling Network (DEP)` proposed in [Deep Texture Manifold for Ground Terrain Recognition](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10896) [*CVPR*, 2018] to merge the output of an `Encoding` layer with the output of a standard global average pooling, where both features are extracted from `conv` output of the same `ResNet` base. The intuition is that the former represents textures (orderless encoding) and the latter represents spatially structured observations, so that "[the] outer product representation captures a pairwise correlation between the material texture encodings and spatial observation structures."

![DEP-Architecture](./docs/DEP_diagram.png)

## Bilinear `pooling`

`bilinearpooling.py` provides a few convenience functions for creating symmetric or asymmetric B-CNN models in Keras with bilinear pooling, as proposed in [Bilinear CNNs for Fine-grained Visual Recognition](http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/bcnn/docs/bcnn_iccv15.pdf) (*ICCV*, 2015).

`bilinearpooling.pooling`:

- Average pooling of local feature vector outer products in `tensorflow`
- Includes element-wise signed square root and L2 normalization
- If using `combine`, you won't need to reference this explicitly

`bilinearpooling.combine`: 

- Takes two `keras` models `fA` and `fB` with output shapes `(N, H, W, cA)`, `(N, H, W, cB)`
- Maps `[fA.output, fB.output]` to shape `(N, cA, cB)` with `bilinear.pooling`
- Flattens, connects to `softmax` output using a specifiable number of `Dense` layers.
- Returns the resulting `keras.models.Model` instance

## FV-CNN

The `texture.fisher` module provides the `FVCNN` class for generating Fisher vector encodings from pretrained CNNs using the `cyvlfeat` wrappers for the `VLFeat` C library. It can be constructed explicitly with an arbitrary CNN, or with a string specifying one of the supported models from `keras.applications`. A "training" set is required to generate the Gaussian Mixture Model of the feature vector distribution, which can then be used to generate encodings on the fly, or to construct and train an SVM as part of the class instance.

#### Usage Notes

- Be careful with reuse of single model for `fA` and `fB` (*e.g.*, asymmetry via different output layers). Weights will be shared if you use the same instantiation of the original model to generate both models.

See `build_demo.ipynb` for examples of constructing symmetric and asymmetric B-CNNs using pretrained `VGG19` and `Xception` models from `keras.applications`.

#### Benchmarks

Working on benchmarking models constructed with this implementation on the three benchmark datasets referenced in the original B-CNN paper:

- [Birds-200](http://www.vision.caltech.edu/visipedia/CUB-200-2011.html) (2011 version)
- [FGVC-Aircraft](http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/data/fgvc-aircraft/)
- [Cars](https://ai.stanford.edu/~jkrause/cars/car_dataset.html)

You can run the `benchmark.py` script to build a model for `Birds-200`, after collecting dataset into `npy` files with `collect_dataset.py`:
```
$ python benchmark.py --help
```
Note: right now includes 1x1 conv to reduce `D` from `512 -> 32`. The former induces a fully connected layer w/ over 50 million weights (`200*512^2`), so training is unreasonably slow.

## Further Improvements

#### Encoding

- `ResNet` based constructors for feature networks

#### Bilinear

- Add Logistic Regression initialization for `softmax` layer
- Add support for `fA` and `fB` to have different input shapes (technically only output shapes need to correspond).
- Add support for `fA` and `fB` to have different output shapes (crop/interpolate/pool to match them)

Would also like to add the matrix square root normalization layer as described in:
```
@inproceedings{lin2017impbcnn,
    Author = {Tsung-Yu Lin, and Subhransu Maji},
    Booktitle = {British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC)},
    Title = {Improved Bilinear Pooling with CNNs},
    Year = {2017}}
```
Authors claim this improves accuracy by several % on fine-grained recognition benchmarks.

#### DEP

- Utilities for combining a base CNN with `Encoding` & `BilinearModel` to create a `Deep Encoding Pooling Network`.

Commit message:

Finish FV-CNN, one split DTD test

README.md, after:

**TODO**: 

- Weight initializers
    - Logistic Regression init. for `softmax` layers (esp. for large layers -- e.g., bilinear pooling output)
    - Try [ConvolutionAware](https://github.com/keras-team/keras-contrib/blob/master/keras_contrib/initializers/convaware.py) for CNNs
- Base CNN builders 
    - Convert weights from ResNet18/34 pre-trained `Caffe` models
    - Check out wide/dilated ResNet blocks from [keras-contrib/applications](https://github.com/keras-team/keras-contrib/blob/master/keras_contrib/applications))
- Figure out Buffer bugs when passing `covariance_bound` to `cyvlfeat.gmm.gmm`
- Tests and benchmarks

# keras-texture

Implementations of several `keras` layers, model classes, and other utilities that are useful in constructing models for texture recognition and fine-grained classification problems. It is a work in progress, and currently the `tensorflow` backend is required.

Develop-mode installable with `pip install -e .` The root module of package is `texture`.

## Requirements

- `numpy`
- `scikit-image`
- `keras`>=2.0
- `tensorflow`

The TensorFlow requirement is not enforced in `setup.py`, due to the ambiguity between `tensorflow` and `tensorflow-gpu`. This package allows CPU or GPU versions, since some functionality (*e.g.*, Fisher vector encoding with pretrained models) shouldn't necessarily require a GPU.

#### Additional requirements: FV-CNN

Use of the Fisher vector CNN class (`texture.fisher.FVCNN`) requires the [cyvlfeat](https://github.com/menpo/cyvlfeat) wrappers for VLFeat, which should be installed using conda: `conda install -c menpo cyvlfeat`, if at all possible. It also requires `scikit-learn`, particularly the `svm.LinearSVC` class.

Neither of these packages are required in other `texture` modules, so they are not explicitly enforced in `setup.py`.

# Contents

## `Encoding` Layer

The residual encoding layer proposed in [Deep TEN: Texture Encoding Network](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.02844.pdf) [*CVPR*, 2017]. This `keras` implementation is largely based on the [PyTorch-Encoding](https://github.com/zhanghang1989/PyTorch-Encoding) release by the paper authors.

<p align="center">
  <img src="./docs/Encoding-Layer_diagram.png?raw=true" alt="Encoding-Layer diagram"/>
</p>

The layer learns a `KxD` dictionary of codewords (a "codebook"), and codeword assignment `scale` weights. These are used to encode the residuals of an input of shape `NxD` or `HxWxD` with respect to the codewords. Includes optional L2 normalization of output vectors (`True` by default) and dropout (`None` by default). Unlike the `PyTorch-Encoding` version, only the number of codewords `K` needs to be specified at construction time -- the feature size `D` is inferred from the `input_shape`.

## `BilinearModel` Layer

`BilinearModel` is a trainable `keras` layer implementing the weighted outer product of inputs with shape `[(batches,N),(batches,M)]`. The original idea of bilinear modeling for computer vision problems was proposed in [Learning Bilinear Models for Two-Factor Problems in Vision](http://www.merl.com/publications/docs/TR96-37.pdf) [*CVPR*, 1997].

It is used in the `Deep Encoding Pooling Network (DEP)` proposed in [Deep Texture Manifold for Ground Terrain Recognition](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.10896) [*CVPR*, 2018] to merge the output of an `Encoding` layer with the output of a standard global average pooling, where both features are extracted from `conv` output of the same `ResNet` base. The intuition is that the former represents textures (orderless encoding) and the latter represents spatially structured observations, so that "[the] outer product representation captures a pairwise correlation between the material texture encodings and spatial observation structures."

![DEP-Architecture](./docs/DEP_diagram.png)

## Bilinear `pooling`

`bilinearpooling.py` provides a few convenience functions for creating symmetric or asymmetric B-CNN models in Keras with bilinear pooling, as proposed in [Bilinear CNNs for Fine-grained Visual Recognition](http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/bcnn/docs/bcnn_iccv15.pdf) (*ICCV*, 2015).

`bilinearpooling.pooling`:

- Average pooling of local feature vector outer products in `tensorflow`
- Includes element-wise signed square root and L2 normalization
- If using `combine`, you won't need to reference this explicitly

`bilinearpooling.combine`: 

- Takes two `keras` models `fA` and `fB` with output shapes `(N, H, W, cA)`, `(N, H, W, cB)`
- Maps `[fA.output, fB.output]` to shape `(N, cA, cB)` with `bilinear.pooling`
- Flattens, connects to `softmax` output using a specifiable number of `Dense` layers.
- Returns the resulting `keras.models.Model` instance

#### Usage Notes

- Be careful with reuse of single model for `fA` and `fB` (*e.g.*, asymmetry via different output layers). Weights will be shared if you use the same instantiation of the original model to generate both models.

If the dimensionality of local feature vectors is 512, and there are `N` classes, the size of a fully-connected classification layer will be very large (`512*512*N=262,144*N`). With random weight initialization, it seems pretty difficult to train a layer of this size for moderate to large `N`, so I'm looking at writing an initializer that uses logistic regression, something which is *not* mentioned in the paper, but which is present in the authors' matlab release.

## FV-CNN

The `texture.fisher` module provides the `FVCNN` class for generating Fisher vector encodings from pretrained CNNs using the `cyvlfeat` wrappers for the `VLFeat` C library. A `FVCNN` instance can be constructed with an arbitrary CNN, or with a string specifying one of the supported ImageNet-pretrained models from `keras.applications`. A training set of images is required to generate the Gaussian Mixture Model of local feature vector distribution and train a support vector classifier. The training set can be a batch-style 4D numpy array, or a list of variable-size 3D image arrays.

## Benchmarks

Working on benchmarking models constructed with various texture recognition datasets:


Some fine-grained classification datasets are also of interest, but benchmarking those has a lower priority for me at the moment:

- [Birds-200](http://www.vision.caltech.edu/visipedia/CUB-200-2011.html) (2011 version)
- [FGVC-Aircraft](http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/data/fgvc-aircraft/)
- [Cars](https://ai.stanford.edu/~jkrause/cars/car_dataset.html)

## Further Improvements

#### Encoding

- Smaller `ResNet`-based constructors for feature networks

#### Bilinear

- Add Logistic Regression initialization for `softmax` layer
- Add support for `fA` and `fB` to have different input shapes (technically only output shapes need to correspond).
- Add support for `fA` and `fB` to have different output shapes (crop/interpolate/pool to match them)

Would also like to add the matrix square root normalization layer as described in:
```
@inproceedings{lin2017impbcnn,
    Author = {Tsung-Yu Lin, and Subhransu Maji},
    Booktitle = {British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC)},
    Title = {Improved Bilinear Pooling with CNNs},
    Year = {2017}}
```
Authors claim this improves accuracy by several % on fine-grained recognition benchmarks.

#### DEP

- Utilities for combining a base CNN with `Encoding` & `BilinearModel` to create a `Deep Encoding Pooling Network`.
